[2026-02-16] [kaspa] [philosophy] [absurdity]
In which it was never my choice to hold the fire we found*

Kaspa is an absurd project.
---
[2025-04-04] [kaspa] [governance] [identity]
In which we are all faceless until we have faces*

Ur of the Chaldees
---
[2021-05-05] [kaspa] [trust] [sync] [pow]
In which mayday mayday we are syncing about*

Don’t trust, terrify!

In which mayday mayday we are syncing about*
Don’t trust, terrify!
The “don’t trust, verify!” slogan is beyond my comprehension. I board airplanes without verifying anything about the pilot or the aircraft; I visit restaurants and foolishly eat — without verifying what will be transmitted to my blood; I take medicines without verifying the supply chain. Why would I protect my money with measures I am not taking to protect my life?!
This reminds me of Jacob, the forefather of Israel, who crossed the Jordan river some 35 hundred years ago, back to his homeland. Albeit, he forgot a few small pitches (think of dust UTXOs), so we are told by later Talmudic Rabbis, and so he went back to the eastbank, in the middle of the night, alone, to fetch the pitches. This was apparently unsafe, and he met a mysterious figure who wrestled with him, a battle from which he came out with a limp, a divine blessing, and a new name — Israel. The Talmud concludes:
“ From here it is derived that the possessions of the righteous are dearer to them than their bodies. And why do they care so much about their possessions? It is because they do not stretch out their hands to partake of stolen property. “
I hope the connection between this story and SPV sync mode based on multiplicative-hash UTXO-commitments is self explanatory but, just in case, do note that verifying by yourself the proper functioning of all external systems which you rely on is infeasible, unscalable, and anticivil — civilization is the scaling up of function and trust — whereas doing so only with respect to money is peculiar and will cause you to limp.
Why not fiat?
Because fiat supply is inflated unpredictably; because the political printing of money is corrupting the democratic sphere, positing the political debate on allocation of money instead of creation of wealth; because regulators are attempting to control financial transfers, eliminate cash, restrict economic freedom.
We reiterate cryptocurrencies’ golden traits — predictable issuance and censorship resistance. In contrast, the property “no fraudulent transaction ever occurred in this currency system” is not the something (or at least: main thing) users should/care about. Consequently, when joining a cryptocurrency system, checking its issuance and its decentralization is far more important than checking the historical validity of transactions.
Yes, we go so far as to say that users do/should not care about historical corruption. For the user is interested in knowing that the state of her node is the one that is most likely to prevail by the economic majority, not that the state of her node is the valid one in some abstract sense. The primary goal of consensus systems is facilitating agreement, not enforcing consistency. And if the economic majority happens to follow and maintain a ledger to which an invalid transaction entered at some point in history, so be it, the system can still serve its purpose of facilitating agreement even if its constitution was breached at some point in time. Indeed, if code rules, the constitution, are violated time and again, or even not extremely rarely, the wise user should definitely refrain from joining said network. Users are therefore protected from unsafe networks as long as they can safely assume the existence of efficient ways to communicate and diffuse information on such mishaps. This novel way to diffuse information is called The Internet, or its manual predecessor — Civilization.
---
[2020-12-28] [kaspa] [pow] [confirmation] [asic]
In which I have no patience to wait ’til by and by*

A personal take

In which I have no patience to wait ’til by and by*
A personal take
Fun fact: Many Bitcoiners believe that Bitcoin’s 10-minute block time is not too slow and that having a fast block rate is not useful.
---
[2020-12-14] [kaspa] [launch] [mining] [fairness]
In which I love my truly, truly fair*

DAGlabs is a for-profit entity whose business model is based on mining Kaspa. DAGlabs is additionally funding many core Kaspa devs and…

In which I love my truly, truly fair*
DAGlabs is a for-profit entity whose business model is based on mining Kaspa. DAGlabs is additionally funding many core Kaspa devs and researchers.
Fair launch
Kaspa contains no premine or founders’ rewards.
At the same time, Kaspa is neither attempting nor pretending to be a “fair launch” coin, as the term “fair” is subjective, too broad, and absurd; early- and late-comers are at odds and cannot be co-satisfied. Bitcoin is extremely unfair to people born in 2030.
The last major attempt at a fair launch-the Grin MimbleWimble project-was not successful, disappointed too many early members, and effectively buried the project; the community and coin are influencing nothing in crypto today, which is sad and wasteful, as it is a beautiful protocol and was even built in Rustlang.¹ Arguably, two properties of Grin contributed to its failure: it is GPU-based, hence has no barrier to entry and required no long term commitment from its early investors; and it has a constant block reward, leading to high inflation and hindering the store-of-value property for its early participants. Grin’s attempt at mimicking Bitcoin’s organic growth of value and community therefore failed, since the crypto market at that time (and certainly today) was already mature and developed, investment vehicles were well-employed, and participants’ patience had significantly shortened due to other competing innovations.
Community launch
In contrast, Kaspa is a “community launch” coin.
---
[2020-11-24] [ghost] [kaspa] [pow] [blockdag] [origin]
In which I run with the GHOSTs of my hometown*

In his youth he reasoned: Since gold is more valuable, it ranks as money; whilst silver, which is of lesser value, is regarded as…

In which I run with the GHOSTs of my hometown*
In his youth he reasoned: Since gold is more valuable, it ranks as money; whilst silver, which is of lesser value, is regarded as commodity… But at a later age he reasoned: Since silver [coin] is current, it ranks as money; whilst gold, which is not current, is accounted as commodity.
- Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Baba Mezi’a, pg 44
Mistakes happen
In 2013 I entered into a master’s degree program in computer science at the Hebrew University. I was recommended by the head of school to work with Aviv Zohar, but Aviv suggested we work on Bitcoin and, coming from mathematics undergrad studies, I found Bitcoin awfully boring and practical. A half a year later, during Shabbat dinner, a friend told me about Bitcoin, and since I hadn’t done anything useful in the time that passed, I decided to return to Aviv (I spent the preceding semester trying to solve the Goldbach conjecture in order to win a $1M prize. In retrospect, I could have gotten the money by investing a few bucks into Bitcoin. Mistakes happen.¹)
My project lab turned into a Financial Crypto paper analyzing the security-speed tradeoff of Nakamoto Consensus and proposing the GHOST protocol. GHOST is an alternative to Bitcoin’s longest chain rule, using the proof of work embedded in off-chain blocks by traversing the tree structure (resulting from forks under high speed) and selecting the main chain differently. The idea was to count the number of blocks that extend a certain block rather than the length of the chain above it. This was supposed to alleviate the need to suppress the block time and to allow for very speedy blocks without suffering from orphans and deteriorating security. Some time after the protocol’s publication, Vitalik Buterin incorporated GHOST into the Ethereum white paper and roadmap. Ethereum didn’t end up implementing GHOST. However, they did end up implementing a variant of our Inclusive Blockchain Protocols, also published in Financial Crypto that year (coauthored with Yoad Lewenberg). This paper first proposed the directed acyclic graph structure for blocks, the “blockDAG,” but its focus was on increasing throughput (for the same security) and linearizing the block rewards across miners.
Around the same time we developed a more thorough approach towards PoW consensus, and as part of it we realized a weakness in GHOST that does not allow it to scale regardless of network parameters-meaning, GHOST’s block times and throughput, like Bitcoin’s, are still limited by the network’s latency. We then directed our efforts towards devising a PoW protocol, or family of protocols, that would alleviate the speed-security tradeoff, and would allow for arbitrarily short block times (provided the network’s capacity limit is not exceeded). These protocols eventually became my PhD thesis, as well as my personal obsession (there are others, but I find this particular one less useless).
Longest chain is largest 0-cluster
The proposition underlying my PhD research was that PoW can be made into an internet-speed service, if done correctly. Other than achieving speedy confirmation times, high block times reduce the variance of block rewards, mitigate the need to join mining pools, and thereby contribute to the decentralization of mining.
This vision is reinforced by the observation that Nakamoto Consensus is a special case of a larger family of protocols, PHANTOM (in fact, Nakamoto Consensus is the slowest member in this family), which can support a high block rate-subsecond block times, say. These protocols are based on blockDAGs. The core idea behind using a PoW-based DAG is to replace the mining paradigm of Nakamoto Consensus, in which miners propagate and extend the winning chain only, with the more informative paradigm, in which miners propagate and extend the entire history of blocks-each new block points at all recent blocks in the history, rather than to the winning one. This history-the blockDAG ledger-may contain conflicts, so the protocol needs to provide a preference ordering over all blocks in order to resolve inconsistencies. The properties of the resulting blockDAG system, and specifically its resilience to 49% attackers and its speed of convergence, are determined by this ordering protocol.
The latest protocol that we devised is called GHOSTDAG, and it is a member of a family of protocols called PHANTOM. In PHANTOM, we select (i.e., give preference in the ordering protocol) the largest k-cluster in the DAG, where a k-cluster is a sufficiently connected set-”sufficiently” as defined by the k parameter. This pre-encoded parameter represents an upper bound over the expected width of the DAG, informally the expected degree of asynchrony. When you choose k=0, PHANTOM coincides with the longest chain rule, and so it is a family of protocols in which Nakamoto Consensus is a special case. GHOSTDAG is a practical efficient variant of PHANTOM which chooses a large enough k-cluster.
Block liveness matters
Some people argue that “faster block times” is meaningless, and that confirmation times do not depend on block times. I agree that in a highly liquid, GPU-based mining platform a transaction’s time to (probabilistic) settlement does not shorten due to short block times. Having conceded this, in a different post (WIP) I will elaborate on the importance of high block rate for faster confirmations, especially in an ASIC-powered system.
The path to preminelessness
A few years into my PhD, there was interest from the community to build these protocols into a working platform. Guy Corem, and later Sizhao Yang, helped me raise a few million dollars from crypto VCs-a small amount in crypto 2018 terms-and we bootstrapped a small team of developers and researchers called DAGlabs. The money was given with the understanding that there will be no presale of tokens; premine or founders’ rewards models are quite antithetical to a decentralized cryptocurrency project, as they usually (read: always) imply the control of a central organization, be it a for-profit company or a “non-profit” foundation. Instead, DAGlabs used part of the money to purchase mining equipment, and it will participate in the mining of the new token with a plainspoken advantage of being the first to its market. More on this, and on mechanisms for community members to participate in mining, in a separate post. The major part of the funding went into R&D. DAGlabs developed code that is based on a fork of the BTCD full node codebase. A primary objective was keeping the design of the system as close to Bitcoin’s architecture and assumptions as possible: PoW, blocks, UTXO, transactions fees, etc. The codebase underwent significant refactoring by the core devs, who then adapted it to a blockDAG governed by the GHOSTDAG protocol.
Kaspa it is
The vision behind this project is to build a Nakamoto-like service that operates on internet speed. We wanted to build a system that surpasses the limits of Satoshi’s v1 protocol (aka Nakamoto Consensus) yet adheres to the same principles embedded in Bitcoin. Contrary to Satoshi’s vision, Bitcoin did not become a peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Instead, it is solidifying as the ultimate store of value, or e-gold, and that’s pretty much it from the Bitcoin side.² This is not a mild achievement by any measure-it’s one of the most important financial revolutions in human history. Yet it leaves lots of room for improvement (of L1) and/or for choosing different tradeoffs (for L1).
For a thorough inspection of Satoshi’s vision, I highly recommend Examining a Conspiracy Theory about Satoshi’s Intent by Elliot Old.
We look to silver, which presented a different tradeoff vs. gold. As demonstrated in the prefacing quote about gold vs. silver (in the original Aramaic text: Dahava vs. Kaspa), silver was historically treated as less precious than gold but more circulative, less valuable yet more acceptable as payment. With this prospect I suggested the name “Kaspa” for the project; “kaspa” is the Aramaic word for “silver” and “money.”
There are no solutions, only tradeoffs
Aside from optimizing for speed and accelerating the block rate, there are several axes on which I suggest Kaspa trades off differently than Bitcoin:
Increased throughput — gain: lower transaction fees; loss: increased CPU and bandwidth consumption for full nodes. I suggest that Kaspa, unlike Bitcoin, not be optimized for home users being able to run full nodes (even though they most probably would be able to do so, with 2020 commodity hardware) but rather for flexibility and user convenience (manifested in speed of confirmations and low transaction fees). Specifically, Kaspa aims at supporting a few thousands of transactions per second, similar to credit card companies’ transaction volume.An alternative is to keep the throughput of the base layer low, in terms of transaction count and specifically the number of cryptographic primitives per block, yet allow for large payload data, with the intention to support smart contracts in L2. This would keep the CPU requirement for full nodes low, but increase the bandwidth requirement; though one can imagine demand for a new type of node, a partial node, which validates all base layer transactions similarly to a full node, yet skips on the data availability checks with respect to transactions’ payload. I will continue this discussion in a separate post (WIP).
Pruning historical data by default — gain: faster sync for new nodes; loss: new nodes sync in SPV mode, by default, or, if they wish to validate the entire history, through resource heavy (hence more centralized) archival nodes. More on this in a different post (WIP), in which I argue that validating historical data thereby protecting against historical corruption is not meaningful to user sovereignty.
Support for L2 expressiveness — gain: a plethora of use cases; loss: slight increase in the attack surface of the base layer due to the addition of scripts. The base consensus of Kaspa should be Bitcoin-like limited, with scripts that unlock specific users’ scripts and that have no read/write permissions to the entire state. At the same time, innovation around Ethereum L2, specifically Rollups, allows for the base layer to enforce consensus without being aware of [anything other than a hash commitment to the] state. Kaspa should incorporate this, and should participate in the amusing innovation of DeFi going on over Ethereum. I will propose a new design that optimizes for speed of confirmation of L2 transactions in a different post (WIP).
On a zero-sum game vs Litecoin
Admittedly, as Nick Szabo likes to remind us, any new cryptocurrency gets a negative on the social scalability part. This can be said on any new social network, not only money-powered ones. The sentiment against proliferation of coins is shared among almost everyone-we are all maximalists with respect to most cryptocurrencies created by other teams; non-coiners just go one coin further.³
In a sense, Kaspa does not aim to become another member of PoW coins but to replace an existing one — Litecoin. Litecoin was supposed to be the silver to Bitcoin’s gold, so we were told. However, it turned out to be quite totally useless, and provided no meaningful functionality over Bitcoin-it is essentially a basket of minor parameter changes from Bitcoin. From the perspective of a 2020 end-user, there’s no major difference between waiting for 15 minutes and waiting for an hour; both are equivalent forms of “forever.” I admit to not fully understanding the “lite” aspect in Litecoin. Depsite the meme, nothing in Litecoin’s design makes it lighter; it bears the same block size limit as Bitcoin, and a theoretical higher throughput capacity. The only reason it is currently “lite” is that it is empty… But a silver should be used more-not less-frequently than gold to justify itself, and a crypto silver’s ledger should in fact be heavier than Bitcoin’s.
Perhaps it is widely understood that Litecoin is simply a light-minded version of Bitcoin and its community, being more agile, and less principled than Satoshi’s adamant followers. The founder going by @satoshilite does speak more to it than any further discussion. I suppose this light-mindedness was a positive thing at the time, as a testbed for Segwit was very much needed. (Just saying: if serving as a testbed for one patch to Bitcoin’s protocol provided Litecoin with an intrinsic value of 10 10USD, imagine the potential market cap of Kaspa facilitating as a testbed for ten Bitcoin protocol patches!)
My hope is for Kaspa to become a home for the principled community of devs, researchers, and PoW fans, to be a vibrant testbed for new ideas, a place where innovation is welcome (outside the money base!) and the path to integration of tested and justified features is in sight. This agility is one of the privileges of being the self proclaimed “little brother,” and we should take full advantage of it.
The burden of PoW is on us.
Title reference
[1] I did solve the conjecture though, which was really fun and satisfying. It started by first breaking RSA using a hypothetical machine that transmitted waves whose crest points were supposed to coincide with the solutions to the relevant parabolic diophantine equation. It turns out that, for this to work in practice, the size of the machine had to exceed the size of the observable universe, as explained to me by our math professor. He claimed that my solution is equivalent to using an infinite registry, hence trivial. Although he was empathetic and all, I decided to leave the production-ready version for another time.
[2] Notably, there are efforts to make Bitcoin usable for payments at large scale: the Lightning project. It is an interesting albeit unproven path for scaling, one which is more complex conceptually and UX-wise, which requires more trust (watch towers, etc.), and whose economics and decentralization dynamics are yet unknown.
[3] By the way, Richard Dawkins’ original statement assumes a very specific ordering of arguments. But if you first poll for the question whether Nature was created or rather created itself into being, most of us would probably take the former stance, despite disagreements about the pseudoidentity of its Creator. If you then run the GHOST protocol on the nodes of statements you will arrive at a different conclusion that the one Dawkins hoped for. So ordering matters.
Originally published at https://blocklivenessmatters.com on November 24, 2020.
---
[2020-03-04] [ethereum] [rollups] [defi] [scalability]
In which we’ll bе reduced to a spectrum of gray*

Why is Ethereum Ethereum

In which we’ll bе reduced to a spectrum of gray*
Why is Ethereum Ethereum
Sure, Ethereum is great and all, but why? What exactly made it into this vibrant and innovative ecosystem? And can it last? I’m writing this post in an attempt to clarify to self and pinpoint Ethereum’s unique value offering and the emergent decentralized finance ecosystem.
Ethereum’s success is commonly ascribed to its composability, the ability to compose one smart contract on top of another like lego boxes, leaving little-to-no need for development coordination, as once a dev team deployed a smart contract, any other smart contract can access it, permissionlessly. However, while Ethereum does harvest the power of openness and permissionlessness to reuse, extend, and compose different code bases and code components — this is by no means new or unique, it characterizes general open source values and structure. Almost by definition, open source allows one to build software composed of several code bases and libraries developed by others. So shared functionality, or composability of functionalities, isn’t precising the matter.
Composability — everyone’s talking about it
The composability everyone’s referring to is, I suppose, the ability to compose different functionalities while acting on and inside the same state. Ethereum combines open source shared functionality with Nakamoto Consensus to enable shared alterable state.
Without this shared state, the DeFi movement is reduced to a rising demand for using financial products that offer permissionless access to open APIs which communicate over a shared network (otherwise known as: the internet). If it was just transparent finance and open APIs, users wouldn’t be able to issue transactions that access several dapps or financial products simultaneously in a manner whose consequences are predictable and pre-understood. Rather, they would need to transact separately with each dapp, and while these interactions could be automated, the cascade of events across these composable contracts wouldn’t be predictable.
And Ethereum is a game changer for DeFi precisely because it enables predictable cascading transactions, transactions of the form “Alice locks Token Ali and Token Baba in the autonomous contract Compos, Compos increases its pool of Token Ali and Baba, their respective exchange rates adjust, and Alice is added to the list of shareholders benefiting from fees collected by Compos” — all these assertions necessarily happening together (or together not happening). This property is known as atomicity, namely, the guarantee that a set of events and consequences will happen or not happen together. Let your imagination be carried with these endless composability options and you’re on the right track to becoming a DeFi dev.
Of course, transparent and permissionless finance is still an improvement over traditional finance, but these do not capture Ethereum’s ecosystem and the flywheel responsible for growing its network effect.
CAP
In this section I want to illustrate and emphasize that composability + shared state = synchronous composability. Indeed, acting on a shared consensus state effectively requires that each transaction at its turn locks the state, fully executes, and completes its full update of the state, as in the Alice and Compos example above. I disagree with Georgios:
---
[2023-05-03] [kaspa] [asic] [opow] [mining]
Kaspa where to (Part IV, last)

Exciting times for Kaspa!

Kaspa where to (Part IV)
Exciting times for Kaspa!
---
[2022-12-14] [kaspa] [roadmap] [funding]
Kaspa where to (Part III)

Sharing below quick thoughts on development funding models and sustainability, and on the next grant request, with the hopes that my…

Kaspa where to (Part III)
Sharing below quick thoughts on development funding models and sustainability, and on the next grant request, with the hopes that my incentive biases do not contaminate my thought process too much:
DAGKNIGHT (DK) was an academic effort by Sutton and myself, conceived on the New Year of Trees,¹ and released to the open three years later, on the 14th anniversary of Satoshi’s WP release. As its birth-givers, we obviously wish to observe its impact on real world systems, and it doesn’t get more real than Kaspa. The protocol still requires some (presumably, our) attention before standing on its own feet, and we detailed the main TODOs in KIP #2.
One operation mode would be to work on this for the sole sake of bringing our research into fruition, in “weekend project” mode, with no other incentive in play. This path is perhaps the default one in the gift culture of open-source, indeed one which DAGlabs RIP converged on when releasing Kaspa mainnet with neither a premine nor a heads-up on mining nor any founders’ rewards or the likes.
Another operation mode, popularized by Gitcoin, is to receive a grant from the community in exchange for code contribution, occasionally with some milestones or/and timeline commitment. This mode is the prevailing custom in Kaspa community, and accordingly we are publishing today a grant proposal. The grant request is for 70 MKAS, which is ~0.5% of the circulating supply. For comparison, the previous funded grant was 100 MKAS, which was ~1% of the circulating supply.My thought process here is to consider a hypothetical senior software engineer, Alice, with relevant domain expertise. When planning her path forward, Alice will seek either stability or opportunity, and in particular will typically not consider a short-term day-job for the same paycheck she’d receive for a long-term one. With this in mind, it makes little sense to denominate in USD deep-tech Kaspa grants (instability), rather they should be expressed in KAS terms (opportunity).The same mental mode was behind the denomination of the previous grant in KAS, which was at the time greatly off the ballpark salary for the relevant devs. Hence the KAS denomination of this grant proposal too. The 0.5% ask seems reasonable to biased-me, especially when benchmarked against the previous grant.
The community accepting the grant is by no means a necessary condition for having DK implemented on Kaspa — Sutton and I will attempt at implementing it regardless, since, again, there exists already a non-materialistic incentive for us to do so. However, since we are not saints, this will be done on our spare time with non-committal or unspecified timeline.
A third operation mode, which too exists in open-source environments, is to found a for-profit enterprise around an open-source layer, which naturally incentivizes the entity to allocate resources to further development of the kernel. E.g., IBM’s symbiotic relationship with Linux. This path has the highest potential for long-term sustainability, though, of course, a for-profit entity would have its own priorities, and thus the timeline for DK execution would remain equally ambiguous.I imagine this model could more realistically materialize around smart contracts, which are in arm’s reach from financial innovation opportunities. In contrast, DK is strictly an infra development, and has little to do with the app layer.
[1] More on trees’ new year here. We submitted a JIP to upgrade this holiday and include DAGs, but the committee couldn’t reach consensus.
---
[2022-11-26] [kaspa] [roadmap] [dagknight]
Kaspa where to (Part II)

Crypto winters are warm for projects with character.

Kaspa where to (Part II)
Crypto winters are warm for projects with character.
Last month Michal Sutton and I published the DAGKNIGHT protocol (DK), which to the best of our knowledge is the first POW consensus protocol that is responsive to the network’s actual (*adversarial) latency while being resilient to 49% byzantine attackers. DK is the culmination of nearly three years of research, a period in which we weren’t at all sure if the aforementioned property is at all possible to achieve.¹
Some work still needs to be done before considering DK for Kaspa: (i) Completing several missing details in the proof section. (ii) Preparing the paper for peer-review (depends on conference target). (iii) Devising efficient algorithms — the current pseudocode is highly inefficient, as it was optimized for ease of reasoning rather than real world implementation. (iv) Adapting the consensus algorithm to meet additional requirements of an actual cryptocurrency, e.g., the need to regulate minting, control difficulty, and enforce pruning, all of which require a responsive synchronous protocol (rather than DK’s partially synchronous operation mode).
Similarly to GHOSTDAG, DK enables high bps (blocks per second), just with much faster confirmation times. Some research needs to be done in order to suggest the optimal bps — increasing the rate indefinitely doesn’t necessarily shorten confirmation times, as it increases the higher relative latency or DAG width. The increase is both due to more blocks created per second and due to these blocks’ headers being larger. Regarding the latter factor, one can envision a scenario where confirmation times improve by reducing the number of block references inside a block (either in consensus or as a default mining rule), but whether or not this is the case is pending further research.
DK enables additional features, on which more research is needed. (i) One example that comes to mind is flexcaps, a proposal to allow miners to create blocks of different sizes and difficulties. While proposed originally for Bitcoin, at high block rates flexcaps require the DK consensus. To see the connection, observe that larger blocks → higher propagation delay of blocks → more blocks created in parallel → wider DAG; and the DK protocol uniquely does not need to bound in advance the width of the DAG, and can cope with it varying even across short timespans. One motivation for flexcap is to support, in times of peak demand, a higher throughput than that which the system can support on average. Indeed, large blocks consume both instantaneous load on the system (CPU, network congestion, etc.) and an accumulating load (larger UTXO → higher RAM and disk I/O for later block processing), which justifies a gap between the maximum limit on resource consumption and the average one.² This gap is enabled through flexcaps (or through the similar elastic block cap proposal). (ii) Another potential feature is the stealth txns, a construction which utilizes the asynchrony caused by high bps to protect users from MEV (relevant when smart contracts will be developed). More generally, and still in the context of MEV, the fact that many miners can create a block in the “next round”, can be utilized to facilitate richer transaction fee mechanisms, in some resemblance to Flashbots’ recent SUAVE.
Similarly to the Rust upgrade, this consensus upgrade will require a new grant request from the community. A suggested scope and raise amount will follow. I hope miners and other Kaspa whales will find this initiative as desirable and long-term profitable as the previous grant. Our community is evergrowing in size and interests, and raising large funds in the future might become harder and harder, at which point we will need to find other structures to maintain development. Hopefully we haven’t reached yet the tipping point.
Speaking of community size, a Discord moderator pressed a wrong button this week and accidentally kicked out all inactive users from the server, reducing Kaspa Discord community (~12k) by about 25%. The good news is that we learnt that ~9k members were apparently active in the last 30 days, which speaks volume of the quality of the community.
In the spirit of thanksgiving, I am grateful to all 9k of you for turning Kaspa from a sound protocol to a sound money.
[1] More accurately, one of us was positive throughout that a possibility is within a hand’s reach, and the other was skeptic and believed an impossibility result was lurking in the dark. Interestingly, the roles reversed with respect to the question whether Kaspa can take off. We swore not to reveal the corresponding identities of the weak in faith, but the reader can be assured that between the two of us the truth always lies.
[2] In Bitcoin, where there’s no pruning of historical data, the gap is even larger, due to initial blockchain download that full nodes go through by default when onboarding.
---
[2022-07-05] [kaspa] [roadmap] [pow]
Kaspa where to (Part I)

This is a concrete version of a longer post which I started writing but had too much spare time so didn’t complete yet.

Kaspa where to (Part I)
This is a concrete version of a longer post which I started writing but had too much spare time so didn’t complete yet.
Context: One of Kaspa’s core devs, Michael Sutton, suggested a plan to order-of-magnitude enhance Kaspad full-node performance by refactoring the codebase and rewriting it in Rustlang. (https://discord.com/channels/599153230659846165/844142778232864809/993245032670842991)
My twosats on the matter:
Kaspa was initialized as a live proof of an idea, a demonstration of a novel (and very cool, but that’s beside the point) paradigm for permissionless consensus. In bootstrapping Kaspa, I was fully aware that we do not have the resources — or the manpower — or the organization machinery — required to unlock even 5% of Kaspa’s potential, and that some external strategic move will need to happen for that aspiration to come true (think Project Serum and Solana https://defirate.com/ftx-serum-solana/).
For these reasons, as Kaspa OG’s recall, I considered launching Kaspa in testnet mode, then opted for a novel (aka failed) mode, which I coined “gamenet”, and which can be thought of as “testnet with incentives”. While this attempt was apparently naïve and, in retrospect, flawed I am mentioning it to recollect the mindset with which Kaspa was released. (For the same aforementioned reasons I kept myself uninvolved with the exchange listing efforts of Kaspa; I fully appreciate their value to the community, and at the same time I preferred erring on the side of caution).
I agree with concerns voiced by some community members that, in principle, to bring real value efforts should be focused on integration, adoption, marketing, etc. In particular, at this stage, high bps and high tps are imho not a meaningful step towards building a non-hypothetical financial system.
However, our community is still far from the scale and organization necessary to reach actual adoption, if not merely for its still modest treasury size (which is contribution-based, and managed by a few volunteer OG’s). With that in mind, I believe the most correct usage of the funds donated by miners is to continue the path of demonstrating live the original DAG vision, by improving the base layer node and later on perhaps upgrade its consensus; which is precisely the proposal put forward.
The current Kaspad codebase is an adaptation of the Bitcoin client btcd, written in Golang. It enjoys a fine amount of technical debt and great code complexity, which make it difficult for new folks to contribute. The proposed refactoring explicitly aims at writing the codebase in a modular and legible manner, which is arguably even more important than performance enhancement.
For full disclosure, I am working tightly with Sutton for a few years now, and am highly biased in favour of any R&D task or project to which he dedicates his rare talent (cf. Proverbs 27:14). Him availing a few months’ of his full capacity to Kaspa is exceptional, and I hope the community (and esp. miners) will match this generosity. I believe a ballpark of 1% of the circulating supply would be very reasonable.
---
[2021-11-23] [kaspa] [network] [incident]
Kaspa (Black Tuesday)

This post assumes reader context on the crash of the Kaspa network in the course of the last 48 hours, and provides some additional notes…

Kaspa (Black Tuesday)
This post assumes reader context on the crash of the Kaspa network in the course of the last 48 hours, and provides some additional notes and perspective.
(1) To simplify logic and debugging, and since the gamenet concept didn’t really catch air, I removed the random block reward and replaced the average block reward of 500 with a deterministic block reward of 500. Thus, if so far we mined on average 86400x500=43200000 Kaspa per day, we will henceforth mine deterministically 86400x500=43200000 Kaspa per day.
(2) Many ppl expressed their concern about the future rebase that will take place soon. I want to reiterate that the rebase is cosmetic only, it’s a rename, an altering of representation. If you mined so far, say, 10% of the (total or of the circulating) supply of Kaspa, you will posses 10% after the rebase as well.
(3) The deflationary monetary policy HF that I mentioned here (https://discord.com/channels/599153230659846165/909907923084382218/911015904144420895 or https://hashdag.medium.com/kaspa-launch-plan-responding-to-reality-6b4bec449037) will be specified next week, after syncing and mining resume for a few days, the network remains fully operational and confident, and the voluntary Kaspa magicians (Ori, Michael, Elichai) get some sleep and catch up with their own research and ventures.
(4) The community by and large reacted solidly to the crash. Thank you! No-one took it lightheartedly, and at the same time most focus was on providing datadirs and other useful info, getting instructions, funny memes. Let’s hope we won’t need to test ourselves again in similar circumstance.
(5) There was some genuine misunderstanding regarding the approaches we were looking into. Specifically, we were never considering a rollback in the sense of pointing at an early state which we were satisfied with and wanted to revert to, and discarding blocks and transactions appended to it later. Rather, we were searching for the latest state for which we have a certainly-valid UTXO commitment. While many users shared with us up-to-date datadirs, and while we had our own datadirs, we had to spend effort and time to ensure that the UTXO commitment builds correctly. Thus, we (read: aforementioned devs) had to rebuild the state afresh, feed it with such datadirs, and compare the commitments. Fortunately, the UTXO that we built hashed into the same UTXO commitment string embedded in the latest block in the datadir, producing 710f27df423e63aa6cdb72b89ea5a06cffa399d66f167704455b5af59def8e20, which proved that the DAG UTXO algebra was not erroneous, but “merely” a victim of the memory problem. This is not to say the architecture of this module should not be revised and improved — -a more correct architecture would protect it from DB failures.
(6) Kaspa is here to stay, in case you were wondering.
---
[2021-11-18] [kaspa] [launch] [governance]
Kaspa launch plan (responding to reality)

First and foremost I wanted to thank you all for joining and forming this community, for the interest, excitement, and involvement around…

Kaspa launch plan (responding to reality)
First and foremost I wanted to thank you all for joining and forming this community, for the interest, excitement, and involvement around the project. Seeing my PhD obsession — POW DAG consensus — realize itself into a live network and a spontaneous community is thrilling yet humbling. Thank you, Todah!
I’m definitely going to start valuing members-count over citation-count, so please bring more crypto friends to the party!
Every few years a new fair-launched POW cryptocurrency captures the excitement of the community — Litecoin, Monero, Grin, and now Kaspa. May the force be with us.
Since we didn’t anticipate this rapid growth, I didn’t prepare accessible answers to several FAQs. I hope to write a longer post about all this in the coming days, but for now here are some answers:
Monetary policy will be deflationary. Halving will be more aggressive than Bitcoin’s since market conditions are different (order-of-magnitude faster market discovery). When the deflationary scheduling will be activated, and what would be the initial block reward (compared to the current avg of 500) — TBD. We will try to seal this next week or so. These numbers will imply the finite cap on supply. BTW we should rebase the term Kaspa to refer to today’s 1000 Kaspa, say; the current representation feels not so scarce :)
Our proof-of-work is a Kaspa variant of heavy-hash, let’s call it k-heavy-hash. My goal here was to create a CapEx heavy POW function, since I believe this concept is both energy-efficient and provides more miner-commitment (stronger than ASIC since less OpEx burnt). Whether k-heavy-hash is actually CapEx heavy, and whether a different POW function will better serve this goal for Kaspa — is a question I’m open to discuss.
The project is maintained by a few devs, all of which have other full time dealings, and some of which are funded by DAGlabs (but totally self managed). In particular, there’s no company or entity behind the project that is responsible for your wallet, full node, funds, miners. We are here during our spare time. I, for one, am a full time postdoc at Harvard university, and while this project is my PhD baby, I am at the same time dedicated to my postdoc baby. So this is a purely community project, please take that into consideration. What can you do to help? Arrange for more dev-power to learn the codebase and join the efforts; DAGlabs can potentially fund additional devs, as long as they have the ability to manage themselves, open issues, fix bugs, manage PRs, etc.
Roadmap. There is no official roadmap as there’s no organized development. I can write down what devs should be working on IMO, post bug fixing and version updates (HFs). In short, IMO priorities should be accelerating gradually to 10 blocks per second, then implementing an amazing upgrade to the consensus protocol, pending theoretical research results of Michael Sutton. In parallel, if someone can promote a privacy gadget (e.g., bulletproofs) and implementation for Kaspa that would definitely leap us forward.
Next week there will be a hard fork (HF) in order to fix a bug and decrease header size. Tune in on this, especially if you are running a mining full node. A few weeks later there will be a HF to embed said monetary policy.
Will we list the coin on exchanges? There is no “we”, there’s “you”. And I suggest waiting for the community to grow more organically before bringing retail.
When is it recommended to stress test for utxo throughput? You are free to stress test as you wish. However, note that even if bugs are discovered, some time will pass before the devs can make themselves available to fix them. Therefore, I suppose better wait for the current system to prove itself stable for more than two weeks, say.
What about block explorer? I believe next week devs will deploy one.
Feel free to follow me here or on Twitter https://twitter.com/hashdag where I hope to post more Kaspa related material in the coming weeks.
---
[2021-09-22] [kaspa] [launch] [governance]
Kaspa launch plan

 (proposal)
tldr
launch Kaspa in gamenet mode, a research oriented experimental network
inject deliberate fragility into Kaspa launch via random semi-scarce monetary policy
construct battlefield for reward-based and MEV-based reorgs
as community matures and hashrate grows, go full scarcity mode, transition from game- to main- net mode, rendering early (gamenet) stage miners profitable in retrospect
gamenet 2.0 requires developing Ethereum bridge to simulate and practice MEV-reorgs, in order to test and demonstrate DAG consensus’ antifragility
Why Kaspa shouldn’t launch as an ordinary cryptocurrency
[L1, POW, lack of EVM]
There seems to be little room now for a new L1, especially one powered by PoW such as Kaspa. The market has matured, and with it the scope of attacks and manipulations has expanded from direct attacks on block ordering (eg double spends via reorgs, liveness attacks) to attacks that regard txn content — typically in the zero-to-one-confirmations phase — by miners or bots (aka flashbots). Moreover, Kaspa lacks as of now EVM support, rendering it significantly less relevant to the current market.
Gamenet: A proposal to launch Kaspa in a novel experimental mode
Kaspa may be launched as a research-oriented consensus engine that is focused on experimentation, novel testing of dynamics, and a vibrant battlefield for real world cryptoeconomics attacks. I call it gamenet mode.
Cryptoeconomics phase 1
[CPU/GPU mining, uncertain scarcity, low hashrate and security, non-commercializable]
The platform should be CPU/GPU-mineable, to facilitate the base activity; I believe Ethash is a neutral candidate that fits our needs. However, its token should be deliberately unfit for commercialization, in order to penetrate hardcore communities, individuals, and zones that refrain from cooperating with non-BTC or non-ETH tokens. Accordingly, the token’s supply should challenge the ordinary notion of scarcity, and should be unfit for exchange listing. This implies that the platform will obtain low hashrate and low security, at the initial stages.
Gamenet activity
[battle-field, simulation, real world game, selfish mining, reorgs, MEV]
The theme of gamenet’s activity can be thought of as a continuous hackathon over a live network which serves as a battle-test field for simulating real world attacks, manipulations, and dynamics of a multi-player network. The block rewards will incentivize occasional reorg/selfish-mining attacks by strategic and sophisticated miners of the gamenet, whereas transactions in the network will implicitly or directly reflect MEV exploits from real world DeFi systems such as Ethereum.
Community
[R&D groups and individuals, testbed for innovation, recognition by broad crypto community]
The goal is to attract research and dev groups (e.g., flashbots fans) to play, compete and/or collude over the live system, and to extract insights on the real-world dynamics of other live systems such as Ethereum. Further, commercial L2 projects that propose solutions to certain exploits, such as using cryptographic primitives for MEV, can implement those over Kaspa gamenet and prove the robustness of their solution, while others may attempt to refute it. I hope Kaspa will become a center of a vibrant R&D community, and that the general community will look to Kaspa gamenet as a credible source of insights regarding cryptoeconomic dynamics in the wild.
An example for the community’s interest around the topic may be found in this recent summit http://reorg.wtf/
Cryptoeconomics phase 2
[monetary policy solidification, recover scarcity, compensate early community]
As the community and the platform matures, we will want to transition to a solid monetary policy, regulate the supply, and trade over exchanges. To this end, we may set an automatic trigger in consensus that will eliminate the randomness in the monetary policy, and the uncertainty of the supply, once a certain hashrate is reached. This will automatically compensate early participants — the early miners of the network — by rendering the mined tokens scarce in retrospect. See below for specifics. See https://fc21.ifca.ai/papers/222.pdf by Lucianna Kiffer for a related design.
Kaspa development and support
[community+product management, further development and support]
As a continuous real-world hackathon, Kaspa gamenet can significantly enjoy some product and community management, conveying and demonstrating to the community the rules of the game and example dynamics. Community members are welcome to take the lead on these fronts.
On the development side, and closer to the backend, explicit MEV activity can be simulated via a bridge from Ethereum. While not necessary for gamenet, I believe gamenet+MEV will make the platform much more attractive a battle-field.
Individuals capable and willing to take upon themselves some of these efforts, and who require funding, may DM me.
Timeline
[Kaspad ready mid October, Kaspa launch end of October, full gamenet activity TBD]
Kaspad — the core consensus component of Kaspa — will be production ready (though untested) by mid October. The remaining features are (1) implementation of the monetary policy described below, (2) plugging in the chosen PoW function.
The execution of components that enhance gamenet activity depends on community engagement.
Monetary policy and block rewards
Requirements
The block reward should incorporate randomness so as to:
Test selfish mining and reorg attacks,
Introduce uncertainty regarding the supply,
Incentivize extending the main chain, 95% of the time (say),
Incentivize forking the chain when the reward — or the MEV opportunity — is exceptionally high.
Concrete proposal
Have each block mint a random amount of Kaspa, where the randomness is a function of the last $M$ blocks. The result of the randomness, the “sampling”, should depend on the block’s hash, to ensure that it cannot be gamed. The randomness should not be a function of the previous block only ($M=1$) because that will lend itself to frequent forking attacks. At the same time, it should be responsive to recent blocks, to ensure a sufficient degree of uncertainty with respect to the supply (so $M=10¹²$ won’t do, as well). I propose $M=~100$ blocks.
Formal description
Given a DAG $G$, GHOSTDAG outputs a chain $C(G) \subseteq G$. For each block $B ∈ G$, let $merging(B)$ be the earliest block in $C(G)$ that contains $B$ in its past. For each block $B ∈ G$, $B.selectedParent$ is the tip of the chain $C(past(B))$. For each block $B ∈ G$, $mergeSet(B,G)$ is defined as $past(B)∖ past(B.selectedParent)$ if $B$ is in $C(G)$, and the emptyset otherwise.
The reward of blocks in G, $rew(*)$, is defined by:
$rew(genesis) = const_1$
$rew(B) = const_2*avg_{D \in prvs M blocks of B}rew(D)*4^x + const_3*sum_{D\in mergeSet(B)}(rew(D))$
where $x$ is a random variable drawn from the normal distribution (mean 0, std 1), and which is uncontrollable by the miner (it is the result of the block hash). $const_1=1$, and $0<const_2,const_3<1$ should be in the order of $0.9$ and $0.1$ respectively; $M$ should be in the order of 100 as mentioned.
Hashrate trigger
Once the network reaches a meaningful hashrate, one that corresponds to operational expenses of $I=250k USD$ per week (say), the randomness should be eliminated, and then each block should mine a block reward of $rew(B) = const_3$ (const_3=1, say). This could be triggered automatically in consensus and requires no soft/hardfork.
Finality parameter
In phase 1, due to the expected low security, the finality parameter of the system should probably be set to be in the order of minutes rather than hours. In case of netsplits, the conflict should be resolved manually, which is a legitimate practice in a non-mainnet platform.
